No. 8791
CAMEROON, CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, 
GAMBIA, HOLY SEE, SENEGAL, etc.
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees. Done at New 
York, on 31 January 1967
Official texts: English, French, Chinese, Russian and Spanish. 
Registered ex officio on 4 October 1967.
CAMEROUN, RÉPUBLIQUE CENTRAFRICAINE, 
GAMBIE, SAINT-SIÈGE, SÉNÉGAL, etc.
Protocole relatif au statut des réfugiés. Fait à New York, le 
31 janvier 1967
Textes officiels anglais, français, chinois, russe et espagnol. 
Enregistré d'office le 4 octobre 1967.
268 United Nations — Treaty Series 1967
No. 8791. PROTOCOL 1 RELATING TO THE STATUS OF 
REFUGEES. DONE AT NEW YORK, ON 31 JANUARY 
1967
The States Parties to the present Protocol,
Considering that the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees done at 
Geneva on 28 July 195P (hereinafter referred to as the Convention) covers only 
those persons who have become refugees as a result of events occurring before 
1 January 1951,
Considering that new refugee situations have arisen since the Convention 
was adopted and that the refugees concerned may therefore not fall within the 
scope of the Convention,
Considering that it is desirable that equal status should be enjoyed by all 
refugees covered by the definition in the Convention irrespective of the dateline 
1 January 1951,
Have agreed as follows :
Article I 
GENERAL PROVISION
1. The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake to apply articles 2 to 34 
inclusive of the Convention to refugees as hereinafter defined.
2. For the purpose of the present Protocol, the term " refugee " shall, except 
as regards the application of paragraph 3 of this article, mean any person within 
the definition of article 1 of the Convention as if the words " As a result of events 
occurring before 1 January 1951 and ..." and the words "... as a result of 
such events ", in article 1 A (2) were omitted.
1 On the recommendation of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees, the High Commissioner submitted the draft of the above- 
mentioned Protocol to the General Assembly of the United Nations, through the Economic and 
Social Council, in the addendum to his report concerning measures to extend the personal scope of 
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. The Economic and Social Council, in resolu 
tion 1186 (XLI) of 18 November 1966, took note with approval of the draft Protocol and transmitted 
the said addendum to the General Assembly. The General Assembly, in resolution 2198 (XXI) 
of 16 December 1966, took note of the Protocol and requested the Secretary-General " to transmit 
the text of the Protocol to the States mentioned in article V thereof, with a view to enabling them 
to accede to the Protocol. "
In accordance with article VIII, paragraph 1, the Protocol came into force on 4 October 1967, 
the date of deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the sixth instrument of 
accession, in respect of the following States on behalf of which the instruments of accession were 
deposited on the dates indicated : 
Holy See ............ 8 June 1967 Gambia .............. 29 September 1967
Central African Republic 30 August 1967 Senegal .............. 3 October 1967
Cameroon ............ 19 September 1967 Sweden. ............... 4 October 1967
2 United Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. 189, p. 137.
270 United Nations — Treaty Series 1967
3. The present Protocol shall be applied by the States Parties hereto without 
any geographic limitation, save that existing declarations made by States already 
Parties to the Convention in accordance with article 1 B (1) (a) of the Convention, 
shall, unless extended under article 1 B (2) thereof, apply also under the present 
Protocol.
Article II 
CO-OPERATION OF THE NATIONAL AUTHORITIES WITH THE UNITED NATIONS
1. The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake to co-operate with the 
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or any other 
agency of the United Nations which may succeed it, in the exercise of its 
functions, and shall in particular facilitate its duty of supervising the application 
of the provisions of the present Protocol.
2. In order to enable the Office of the High Commissioner, or any other agency 
of the United Nations which may succeed it, to make reports to the competent 
organs of the United Nations, the States Parties to the present Protocol undertake 
to provide them with the information and statistical data requested, in the 
appropriate form, concerning :
(a) The condition of refugees ; 
(6) The implementation of the present Protocol ;
(c) Laws, regulations and decrees which are, or may hereafter be, in force 
relating to refugees.
Article III 
INFORMATION ON NATIONAL LEGISLATION
The States Parties to the present Protocol shall communicate to the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations the laws and regulations which they 
may adopt to ensure the application of the present Protocol.
Article IV 
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Any dispute between States Parties to the present Protocol which relates to 
its interpretation or application and which cannot be settled by other means shall 
be referred to the International Court of Justice at the request of any one of the 
parties to the dispute.
No. 8791
272 United Nations — Treaty Series 1967
Article V 
ACCESSION
The present Protocol shall be open for accession on behalf of all States 
Parties to the Convention and of any other State Member of the United Nations 
or member of any of the specialized agencies or to which an invitation to accede 
may have been addressed by the General Assembly of the United Nations. 
Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article VI
FEDERAL CLAUSE
In the case of a Federal or non-unitary State, the following provisions shall 
apply :
(a) With respect to those articles of the Convention to be applied in 
accordance with article I, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol that come within 
the legislative jurisdiction of the federal legislative authority, the obligations of 
the Federal Government shall to this extent be the same as those of States 
Parties which are not Federal States ;
(b) With respect to those articles of the Convention to be applied in 
accordance with article I, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol that come within 
the legislative jurisdiction of constituent States, provinces or cantons which are 
not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound to take legislative 
action, the Federal Government shall bring such articles with a favourable 
recommendation to the notice of the appropriate authorities of States, provinces 
or cantons at the earliest possible moment ;
(c) A Federal State Party to the present Protocol shall, at the request of any 
other State Party hereto transmitted through the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, supply a statement of the law and practice of the Federation and 
its constituent units in regard to any particular provision of the Convention to 
be applied in accordance with article I, paragraph 1, of the present Protocol, 
showing the extent to which effect has been given to that provision by legislative 
or other action.
Article VII 
RESERVATIONS AND DECLARATIONS
1. At the time of accession, any State may make reservations in respect of 
article IV of the present Protocol and in respect of the application in accordance 
with article I of the present Protocol of any provisions of the Convention other 
than those contained in articles 1, 3, 4, 16 (1) and 33 thereof, provided that in
No. 8791
274_________ United Nations — Treaty Series 1967
the case of a State Party to the Convention reservations made under this article 
shall not extend to refugees in respect of whom the Convention applies.
2. Reservations made by States Parties to the Convention in accordance with 
article 42 thereof shall, unless withdrawn, be applicable in relation to their 
obligations under the present Protocol.
3. Any State making a reservation in accordance with paragraph 1 of this 
article may at any time withdraw such reservation by a communication to that 
effect addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
4. Declaration made under article 40, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Convention by 
a State Party thereto which accedes to the present Protocol shall be deemed to 
apply in respect of the present Protocol, unless upon accession a notification to 
the contrary is addressed by the State Party concerned to the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. The provisions of article 40, paragraphs 2 and 3, and of 
article 44, paragraph 3, of the Convention shall be deemed to apply mutatis 
mutandis to the present Protocol.
Article VIII 
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. The present Protocol shall come into force on the day of deposit of the sixth 
instrument of accession.
2. For each State acceding to the Protocol after the deposit of the sixth instru 
ment of accession, the Protocol shall come into force on the date of deposit by 
such State of its instrument of accession.
Article IX 
DENUNCIATION
1. Any State Party hereto may denounce this Protocol at any time by a notifica 
tion addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. Such denunciation shall take effect for the State Party concerned one year 
from the date on which it is received by the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations.
Article X 
NOTIFICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform the States 
referred to in article V above of the date of entry into force, accessions, reserva 
tions and withdrawals of reservations to and denunciations of the present 
Protocol, and of declarations and notifications relating hereto.
No. 8791
276 United Nations — Treaty Series 1967
Article XI
DEPOSIT IN THE ARCHIVES OF THE SECRETARIAT OF THE UNITED NATIONS
A copy of the present Protocol, of which the Chinese, English, French, 
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, signed by the President of the 
General Assembly and by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, shall be 
deposited in the archives of the Secretariat of the United Nations. The 
Secretary-General will transmit certified copies thereof to all States Members of 
the United Nations and to the other States referred to in article V above.
No. 8791