No. 2545
AUSTRALIA, BELGIUM, DENMARK,
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY,
LUXEMBOURG, etc.
Final Act of the United Nations Conference of Plenipoten 
tiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless Persons. 
Held at Geneva from 2 July 1951 to 25 July 1951
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (with schedule). 
Signed at Geneva, on 28 July 1951
Official texts: English and French. 
Registered ex officio on 22 April 1954.
AUSTRALIE, BELGIQUE, DANEMARK,
RÉPUBLIQUE FÉDÉRALE D'ALLEMAGNE,
LUXEMBOURG, etc.
Acte final de la Conférence de plénipotentiaires des Nations 
Unies sur le statut des réfugiés et des apatrides. Tenue 
à Genève du 2 juillet 1951 au 25 juillet 1951
Convention relative au statut des réfugiés (avec annexe). 
Signée à Genève, le 28 juillet 195l
Textes officiels anglais et français. 
Enregistrés d'office le 22 avril 1954.
138 United Nations   Treaty Series 1954
No. 2545. FINAL ACT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CON 
FERENCE OF PLENIPOTENTIARIES ON THE STATUS 
OF REFUGEES AND STATELESS PERSONS. HELD AT 
GENEVA, FROM 2 JULY 1951 TO 25 JULY 1951
I
The General Assembly of the United Nations, by Resolution 429 (V) of 
14 December 1950,1 decided to convene in Geneva a Conference of Pleni 
potentiaries to complete the drafting of, and to sign, a Convention a relating to the 
Status of Refugees and a Protocol relating to the Status of Stateless Persons.
The Conference met at the European Office of the United Nations in Geneva 
from 2 to 25 July 1951.
The Governments of the following twenty-six States were represented by 
delegates who all submitted satisfactory credentials or other communications 
of appointment authorizing them to participate in the Conference :
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Colombia
Denmark
Egypt
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Greece
Holy See
Iraq
IsraelItaly
Luxembourg
Monaco
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Switzerland (the Swiss delegation also
represented Liechtenstein) 
Turkey 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Nothern Ireland 
United States of America 
Venezuela 
Yugoslavia
The Governments of the following two States were represented by observers :
Cuba 
Iran
Pursuant to the request of the General Assembly, the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees participated, without the right to vote, in the deliber 
ations of the Conference.
1 United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 20 
(A/1775), p. 48.
1 See p, 150 of this volume.
140 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
The International Labour Organisation and the International Refugee Organ 
ization were represented at the Conference without the right to vote.
The Conference invited a representative of the Council of Europe to be repre 
sented at the Conference without the right to vote.
Representatives of the following Non-Governmental Organizations in consult 
ative relationship with the Economic and Social Council were also present as 
observers :
Category A
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions 
International Federation of Christian Trade Unions 
Inter-Parliamentary Union
Category B
Agudas Israel World Organization
Caritas Internationalis
Catholic International Union for Social Service
Commission of the Churches on International Affairs
Consultative Council of Jewish Organizations
Co-ordinating Board of Jewish Organizations
Friend©s World Committee for Consultation
International Association of Penal Law
International Bureau for the Unification of Penal Law
International Committee of the Red Cross
International Council of Women
International Federation of Friends of Young Women
International League for the Rights of Man
International Social Service
International Union for Child Welfare
International Union of Catholic Women©s Leagues
Pax Romana
Women©s International League for Peace and Freedom
World Jewish Congress
World Union for Progressive Judaism
World Young Women©s Christian Association
Register
International Relief Committee for Intellectual Workers
League of Red Cross Societies
Standing Conference of Voluntary Agencies
World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts
World University Service
No. 2545
142 United Nations   Treaty Series 1954
Representatives of Non-Governmental Organizations which have been granted 
consultative status by the Economic and Social Council as well as of those entered 
by the Secretary-General on the Register referred to in Resolution 288 B (X)l 
of the Economic and Social Council, paragraph 17, had under the rules of procedure 
adopted by the Conference the right to submit written or oral statements to the 
Conference.
The Conference elected Mr. Knud Larsen, of Denmark, as President, and 
Mr. A. Herment, of Belgium, and Mr. Talat Miras, of Turkey, as Vice-Pr sidents.
At its second meeting, the Conference, acting on a proposal of the represent 
ative of Egypt, unanimously decided to address an invitation to the Holy See 
to designate a plenipotentiary representative to participate in its work. A repre 
sentative of the Holy See took his place at the Conference on 10 July 1951.
The Conference adopted as its agenda the Provisional Agenda drawn up 
by the Secretary-General (A/CONF.2/2/Rev.l). It also adopted the Provisional 
Rules of Procedure drawn up by the Secretary-General, with the addition of 
a provision which authorized a representative of the Council of Europe to be 
present at the Conference without the right to vote and to submit proposals 
(A/CONF.2/3/Rev.l).
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, the President 
and Vice-Pr sidents examined the credentials of representatives and on 17 July 1951 
reported to the Conference the results of such examination, the Conference adopting 
the report.
The Conference used as the basis of its discussions the draft Convention 
relating to the Status of Refugees and the draft Protocol relating to the Status 
of Stateless Persons prepared by the ad hoc Committe on Refugees and Stateless 
Persons at its second session held in Geneva from 14 to 25 August 1950, with the 
exception of the preamble and article 1 (Definition of the term "refugee") of 
the draft Convention. The text of the preamble before the Conference was that 
which was adopted by the Economic and Social Council on 11 August 1950 in 
Resolution 319 B II (XI). The text of article 1 before the Conference was that 
recommended by the General Assembly on 14 December 1950 and contained in 
the Annex to Resolution 429 (V). The latter was a modification of the text as 
it had been adopted by the Economic and Social Council in Resolution 319 B II 
(XI).*
The Conference adopted the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 
in two readings. Prior to its second reading it established a Style Committee 
composed of the President and the representatives of Belgium, France, Israel,
1 United Nations, Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fifth Year, Tenth 
Session, Supplement No. 1 (E/1661), p. 24.
* The texts referred to in the paragraph above are contained in document A/CONF.2/1.
No. 2545
144 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Italy, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United 
States of America, together with the High Commissioner for Refugees, which 
elected as its Chairman Mr. G. Warren, of the United States of America. The 
Style Committee redrafted the text which had been adopted by the Conference 
on first reading, particularly from the point of view of language and of concordance 
between the English and French texts.
The Convention was adopted on 25 July by 24 votes to none with no absten 
tions and opened for signature at the European Office of the United Nations from 
28 July to 31 August 1951. It will be re-opened for signature at the permanent 
headquarters of the United Nations in New York from 17 September 1951 to 
31 December 1952.
The English and French texts of the Convention, which are equally authentic, 
are appended to this Final Act.
II
The Conference decided, by 17 votes to 3 with 3 abstentions, that the titles 
of the chapters and of the articles of the Convention are included for practical 
purposes and do not constitute an element of interpretation.
III
With respect to the draft Protocol relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, 
the Conference adopted the following resolution :
"THE CONFERENCE,
"HAVING CONSIDERED the draft Protocol relating to the Status of Stateless 
Persons,
"CONSIDERING that the subject still requires more detailed study,
"DECIDES not to take a decision on the subject at the present Conference 
and refers the draft Protocol back to the appropriate organs of the United 
Nations for further study."
IV 
The Conference adopted unanimously the following recommendations :
"THE CONFERENCE,
"CONSIDERING that the issue and recognition of travel documents i? 
necessary to facilitate the movements of refugees, and in particular their 
resettlement,
"URGES Governments which are parties to the Inter-Governmental 
Agreement on Refugee Travel Documents signed in London on 15 October
No. 2545
146 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
1946, * or which recognize travel documents issued in accordance with the 
Agreement, to continue to issue or to recognize such travel documents, and 
to extend the issue of such documents to refugees as defined in article 1 of 
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or to recognize the travel 
documents so issued to such persons, until they shall have undertaken 
obligations under article 28 of the said Convention."
B
"THE CONFERENCE,
"CONSIDERING that the unity of the family, the natural and fundamental 
group unit of society, is an essential right of the refugee, and that such unity 
is constantly threatened, and
"NOTING with satisfaction that, according to the official commentary 
of the ad hoc Committee on Statelessness and Related Problems (E/1618, 
p. 40) the rights granted to a refugee are extended to members of his family,
"RECOMMENDS Governments to take the necessary measures for the 
protection of the refugee©s family, especially with a view to :
"(1) Ensuring that the unity of the refugee©s family is maintained 
particularly in cases where the head of the family has fulfilled 
the necessary conditions for admission to a particular country ;
"(2) The protection of refugees who are minors, in particular unaccom 
panied children and girls, with special reference to guardianship 
and adoption."
C 
"THE CONFERENCE,
"CONSIDERING that, in the moral, legal and material spheres, refugees 
need the help of suitable welfare services, especially that of appropriate 
non-governmental organizations ;
"RECOMMENDS Governments and intergovernmental bodies to facilitate, 
encourage and sustain the efforts of properly qualified organizations."
D
"THE CONFERENCE,
"CONSIDERING that many persons still leave their country of origin for reasons 
of persecution and are entitled to special protection on account of their 
position,
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. 11, p. 73; Vol. 76, p. 244 ; Vol. 82, p. 328; Vol. 91, 
p. 369, and Vol. 97, p. 314.
No. 2545
148 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
"RECOMMENDS that Governments continue to receive refugees in their 
territories and that they act in concert in a true spirit of international co 
operation in order that these refugees may find asylum and the possibility 
of resettlement."
"THE CONFERENCE
"EXPRESSES the hope that the Convention relating to the Status of 
Refugees will have value as an example exceeding its contractual scope and 
that all nations will be guided by it in granting so far as possible to persons 
in their territory as refugees and who would not be covered by the terms 
of the Convention, the treatment for which it provides."
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the President, Vice-Pr sidents and the Executive 
Secretary of the Conference have signed this Final Act.
DONE at Geneva this twenty-eighth day of July one thousand nine hundred 
and fifty-one in a single copy in the English and French languages, each text 
being equally authentic. Translations of this Final Act into Chinese, Russian 
and Spanish will be prepared by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
who will, on request, send copies thereof to each of the Governments invited to 
attend the Conference.
The President of the Conference : 
Knud LARSEN
The Vice-Pr sidents of the Conference : 
HERMENT 
Talat MIRAS
The Executive Secretary of the Conference : 
John P. HUMPHREY
No. 2545
150 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
CONVENTION 1 RELATING TO THE STATUS OF REFUGEES. 
SIGNED AT GENEVA, ON 28 JULY 1951
Pt gamble
The HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES,
CONSIDERING that the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights approved on 10 December 1948a by the General 
Assembly have affirmed the principle that human beings shall enjoy fundamental 
rights and freedoms without discrimination,
CONSIDERING that the United Nations has, on various occasions, manifested 
its profound concern for refugees and endeavoured to assure refugees the widest 
possible exercise of these fundamental rights and freedoms,
CONSIDERING that it is desirable to revise and consolidate previous inter 
national agreements relating to the status of refugees and to extend the scope 
of and the protection accorded by such instruments by means of a new agreement,
CONSIDERING that the grant of asylum may place unduly heavy burdens on 
certain countries, and that a satisfactory solution of a problem of which the United 
Nations has recognized the international scope and nature cannot therefore be 
achieved without international co-operation,
1 The Convention came into force on 22 April 1954, the ninetieth day following the day ot 
deposit of the sixth instrument of ratification or accession, in accordance with article 43.
The following States deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations their 
instrument of ratification or accession on the dates indicated :
Denmark   also applicable to Greenland ........... 4 December 195©J
(With declaration, see p. 189, and with reservations, see p. 198) 
Norway ......................... 23 March 1953
(With declaration and reservations, see p. 198) 
Belgium ......................... 22 July 1953
(With declaration and reservations, see p. 200) 
Luxembourg ....................... 23 July 1953
(With reservations, see p. 193, and declaration, see p. 200) 
Federal Republic of Germany ................ 1 December 1953
(With declaration, see p. 190) 
Australia (accession)   also applicable to Norfolk Island, Papua,
New Guinea and Nauru .................. 22 January 1954
(With declaration and reservations, see p. 200) 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland   also
applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man ..... 11 March 1954
(With declaration, see p. 197, and with reservations, commen 
tary and declaration, see p. 202)
» United Nations, Official Records of the Third Session of the General Assembly, Part I (A 810;, 
p. 71.
No. 2545
152 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
EXPRESSING the wish that all States, recognizing the social and humanitarian 
nature of the problem of refugees, will do everything within their power to prevent 
this problem from becoming a cause of tension between States,
NOTING that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is charged 
with the task of supervising international conventions providing for the protection 
of refugees, and recognizing that the effective co-ordination of measures taken to 
deal with this problem will depend upon the co-operation of States with the 
High Commissioner,
HAVE AGREED as follows :
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 1
DEFINITION OF THE TERM "REFUGEE"
A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the term "refugee" shall apply 
to any person who :
(1) Has been considered a refugee under the Arrangements of 12 May 
1926 ! and 30 June 19282 or under the Conventions of 28 October 1933s 
and 10 February 1938 4, the Protocol of 14 September 19395 or the Constitution 
of the Internationa] Refugee Organization ;6
Decisions of non-eligibility taken by the International Refugee Organ 
ization during the period of its activities shall not prevent the status of refugee 
being accorded to persons who fulfil the conditions of paragraph 2 of this 
section ;
(2) As a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951 and owing 
to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nation 
ality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside 
the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling 
to avail himself of the protection of that country ; or who, not having a 
nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence 
as a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to 
return to it.
1 League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. LXXXIX, p. 47.
» League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. LXXXIX, pp. 53 and 63 ; Vol. XCIII, p. 377 ; 
Vol. CCIV, p. 445, and Vol. CCV, p. 193.
8 League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CLIX, p. 199 ; Vol. CLXXII, p. 432 ; Vol. CLXXXI, 
p. 429 ; Vol. CC, p. 530 ; Vol. CCIV, p. 464, and Vol. CCV, p. 214.
« League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CXCII, p. 59 ; Vol. CC, p. 572, and Vol. CCV, p. 218.
5 League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CXCVIII, p. 141, and Vol. CCV, p. 219. 
« United Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. 18, p. 3, and Vol. 26, p. 416.
No. 2545
154 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
In the case of a person who has more than one nationality, the term "the 
country of his nationality" shall mean each of the countries of which he is a national, 
and a person shall not be deemed to be lacking the protection of the country of 
his nationality if, without any valid reason based on wellfounded fear, he has 
not availed himself of the projection of one of the countries of which he is a national.
/
B. (1) For the purposes of this Convention, the words "events occurring before 
1 January 1951" in article 1, section A, shall be understood to mean either
ai
(a) "events occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951" ; or 
(V) "events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951" ; 
and each Contracting State shall make a declaration at the time of signature, 
ratification or accession, specifying which of these meanings it applies for the 
purpose of its obligations under this Convention.
(2) Any Contracting State which has adopted alternative (a) may at any 
time extend its obligations by adopting alternative (b) by means of a notification 
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
C. This Convention shall cease to apply to any person falling under the terms 
of section A if :
(1) He has voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of the country 
of his nationality ; or
(2) Having lost his nationality, he has voluntarily reacquired it ; or
(3) He has acquired a new nationality, and enjoys the protection of 
the country of his new nationality ; or
(4) He has voluntarily re-established himself in the country which 
he left or outside which he remained owing to fear of persecution ; or
(5) He can no longer, because the circumstances in connexion with 
which he has been recognized as a refugee have ceased to exist, continue to 
refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality ;
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a refugee falling under 
section A (1) of this article who is able to invoke compelling reasons arising 
out of previous persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection 
of the country of nationality ;
(6) Being a person who has no nationality he is, because the circum 
stances in connexion with which he has been recognized as a refugee have 
ceased to exist, able to return to the country of his former habitual residence ;
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a refugee falling under 
section A (1) of this article who is able to invoke compelling reasons arising
No. 2545
156 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
out of previous persecution for refusing to return to the country of his former 
habitual residence.
D. This Convention shall not apply to persons who are at present receiving from 
organs or agencies of the United Nations other than the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees protection or assistance.
When such protection or assistance has ceased for any reason, without 
the position of such persons being definitively settled in accordance with the 
relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations, 
these persons shall ipso facto be entitled to the benefits of this Convention.
E. This Convention shall not apply to a person who is recognized by the competent 
authorities of the country in which he has taken residence as having the rights 
and obligations which are attached to the possession of the nationality of that 
country.
F. The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with respect 
to whom there are serious reasons for considering that :
(a) he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against 
humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to 
make provision in respect of such crimes ;
(b) he has committed a serious non-political crime outside the country of 
refuge prior to his admission to that country as a refugee ;
(c) he has been guilty of acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the 
United Nations.
Article 2
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
Every refugee has duties to the country in which he finds himself, which 
require in particular that he conform to its laws and regulations as well as to 
measures taken for the maintenance of public order.
Article 3
NON-DISCRIMINATION
The Contracting States shall apply the provisions of this Convention to refugees 
without discrimination as to race, religion or country of origin.
Article 4
RELIGION
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees within their territories treat 
ment at least as favourable as that accorded to their nationals with respect to
No. 2545
158 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
freedom to practice their religion and freedom as regards the religious education 
of their children.
Article 5
RIGHTS GRANTED APART FROM THIS CONVENTION
Nothing in this Convention shall be deemed to impair any rights and benefits 
granted by a Contracting State to refugees apart from this Convention.
Article 6
THE TERM "IN THE SAME CIRCUMSTANCES"
For the purpose of this Convention, the term "in the same circumstances" 
implies that any requirements (including requirements as to length and conditions 
of sojourn or residence) which the particular individual would have to fulfil for 
the enjoyment of the right in question, if he were not a refugee, must be fulfilled 
by him, with the exception of requirements which by their nature a refugee is 
incapable of fulfilling.
Article 7
EXEMPTION FROM RECIPROCITY
1. Except where this Convention contains more favourable provisions, a Contract 
ing State shall accord to refugees the same treatment as is accorded to aliens 
generally.
2. After a period of three years© residence, all refugees shall enjoy exemption 
from legislative reciprocity in the territory of the Contracting States.
3. Each Contracting State shall continue to accord to refugees the rights and 
benefits to which they were already entitled, in the absence of reciprocity, at the 
date of entry into force of this Convention for that State.
-t. The Contracting States shall consider favourably the possibility of according 
to refugees, in the absence of reciprocity, rights and benefits beyond those to 
which they are entitled according to paragraphs 2 and 3, and to extending exemp 
tion from reciprocity to refugees who do not fulfil the conditions provided for 
in paragraphs 2 and 3.
5. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 apply both to the rights and benefits 
referred to in articles 13, 18, 19, 21 and 22 of this Convention and to rights and 
benefits for which this Convention does not provide.
Article 8
EXEMPTION FROM EXCEPTIONAL MEASURES
With regard to exceptional measures which may be taken against the person, 
property or interests of nationals of a foreign State, the Contracting States shall
No. 2545
160 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
not apply such measures to a refugee who is formally a national of the said State 
solely on account of such nationality. Contracting States which, under their 
legislation, are prevented from applying the general principle expressed in this 
article, shall, in appropriate cases, grant exemptions in favour of such refugees.
Article 9
PROVISIONAL MEASURES
Nothing in this Convention shall prevent a Contracting State, in time of 
war or other grave and exceptional circumstances, from taking provisionally 
measures which it considers to be essential to the national security in the case 
of a particular person, pending a determination by the Contracting State that 
that person is in fact a refugee and that the continuance of such measures is 
necessary in his case in the interests of national security.
Article 10
CONTINUITY OF RESIDENCE
1. Where a refugee has been forcibly displaced during the Second World War 
and removed to the territory of a Contracting State, and is resident there, the 
period of such enforced sojourn shall be considered to have been lawful residence 
within that territory.
2. Where a refugee has been forcibly displaced during the Second World War 
from the territory of a Contracting State and has, prior to the date of entry into 
force of this Convention, returned there for the purpose of taking up residence, 
the period of residence before and after such enforced displacement shall be regarded 
as one uninterrupted period for any purposes for which uninterrupted residence 
is required.
Article 11
REFUGEE SEAMEN
In the case of refugees regularly serving as crew members on board a ship 
flying the flag of a Contracting State, that State shall give sympathetic consider 
ation to their establishment on its territory and the issue of travel documents 
to them or their temporary admission to its territory particularly with a view 
to facilitating their establishment in another country.
No. 2545
162 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
CHAPTER II
JURIDICAL STATUS
Article 12
PERSONAL STATUS
1. The personal status of a refugee shall be governed by the law of the country 
of his domicile or, if he has no domicile, by the law of the country of his residence.
2. Rights previously acquired by a refugee and dependent on personal status, 
more particularly rights attaching to marriage, shall be respected by a Contracting 
State, subject to compliance, if this be necessary, with the formalities required 
by the law of that State, provided that the right in question is one which would 
have been recognized by the law of that State had he not become a refugee.
Article 13
MOVABLE AND IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
The Contracting States shall accord to a refugee treatment as favourable 
as possible and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to aliens 
generally in the same circumstances, as regards the acquisition of movable and 
immovable property and other rights pertaining thereto, and to leases and other 
contracts relating to movable and immovable property.
Article li
ARTISTIC RIGHTS AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
In respect of the protection of industrial property, such as inventions, designs 
or models, trade marks, trade names, and of rights in literary, artistic and scientific 
works, a refugee shall be accorded in the country in which he has his habitual 
residence the same protection as is accorded to nationals of that country. In 
the territory of any other Contracting State, he shall be accorded the same protec 
tion as is accorded in that territory to nationals of the country in which he has 
his habitual residence.
Article .1-5
RIGHT OF ASSOCIATION
As regards non-political and non-profit-making associations and trade unions 
the Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their territory 
the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of a foreign country, in the 
same circumstances.
No. 2545
164 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 16
ACCESS TO COURTS
1. A refugee shall have free access to the courts of law on the territory of all 
Contracting States.
2. A refugee shall enjoy in the Contracting State in which he has his habitual 
residence the same treatment as a national in matters pertaining to access to the 
Courts, including legal assistance and exemption from cautio judicatum solvi.
3. A refugee shall be accorded in the matters referred to in paragraph 2 in countries 
other than that in which he has his habitual residence the treatment granted to 
a national of the country of his habitual residence.
CHAPTER III 
GAINFUL EMPLOYMENT
Article 17
WAGE-EARNING EMPLOYMENT
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their 
territory the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of a foreign country 
in the same circumstances, as regards the right to engage in wage-earning em 
ployment.
2. In any case, restrictive measures imposed on aliens or the employment of 
aliens for the protection of the national labour market shall not be applied to a 
refugee who was already exempt from them at the date of entry into force of 
this Convention for the Contracting State concerned, or who fulfils one of the 
following conditions :
(a) He has completed three years© residence in the country.
(b) He has a spouse possessing the nationality of the country of residence. 
A refugee may not invoke the benefit of this provision if he has abandoned 
his spouse ;
(c) He has one or more children possessing the nationality of the country 
of residence.
3. The Contracting States shall give sympathetic consideration to assimilating 
the rights of all refugees with regard to wage-earning employment to those of 
nationals, and in particular of those refugees who have entered their territory 
pursuant to programmes of labour recruitment or under immigration schemes.
No. 2545
166 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 18
SELF-EMPLOYMENT
The Contracting States shall accord to a refugee lawfully in their territory 
treatment as favourable as possible and, in any event, not less favourable than 
that accorded to aliens generally in the same circumstances, as regards the right 
to engage on his own account in agriculture, industry, handicrafts and commerce 
and to establish commercial and industrial companies.
Article 19
LIBERAL PROFESSIONS
1. Each Contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in theii 
territory who hold diplomas recognized by the competent authorities of that 
State, and who are desirous of practising a liberal profession, treatment as favour 
able as possible and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to aliens 
generally in the same circumstances.
2. The Contracting States shall use their best endeavours consistently with 
their laws and constitutions to secure the settlement of such refugees in the terri 
tories, other than the metropolitan territory, for whose international relations- 
they are responsible.
CHAPTER IV
WELFARE
Article 20
RATIONING
Where a rationing system exists, which applies to the population at large 
and regulates the general distribution of products in short supply, refugees shall 
be accorded the same treatment as nationals.
Article 21 
HOUSING
As regards housing, the Contracting States, in so far as the matter is regulated 
by laws or regulations or is subject to the control of public authorities, shall accord 
to refugees lawfully staying in their territory treatment as favourable as possible 
and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to aliens generally 
in the same circumstances.
No. 2545
168 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 22
PUBLIC EDUCATION
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees the same treatment as is 
accorded to nationals with respect to elementary education.
2. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees treatment as favourable 
as possible, and, in any event, not less favourable than that accorded to aliens 
generally in the same circumstances, with respect to education other than element 
ary education and, in particular, as regards access to studies, the recognition of 
foreign school certificates, diplomas and degrees, the remission of fees and charges 
and the award of scholarships.
Article 23
PUBLIC RELIEF
The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their 
territory the same treatment with respect to public relief and assistance as is 
accorded to their nationals.
Article 24
LABOUR LEGISLATION AND SOCIAL SECURITY
1. The Contracting States shall accord to refugees lawfully staying in their 
territory the same treatment as is accorded to nationals in respect of the following 
matters :
(a) In so far as such matters are governed by laws or regulations or are 
subject to the control of administrative authorities : remuneration, 
including family allowances where these form part of remuneration, 
hours of work, overtime arrangements, holidays with pay, restrictions 
on home work, minimum age of employment, apprenticeship and training, 
women©s work and the work of young persons, and the enjoyment of 
the benefits of collective bargaining ;
(b) Social security (legal provisions in respect of employment injury, occupa 
tional diseases, maternity, sickness, disability, old age, death, unem 
ployment, family responsibilities and any other contingency which, 
according to national laws or regulations, is covered by a social security 
scheme), subject to the following limitations :
(i) There may be appropriate arrangements for the maintenance of 
acquired rights and rights in course of acquisition ;
No. 2545
170 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
(ii) National laws or regulations of the country of residence may 
prescribe special arrangements concerning benefits or portions 
of benefits which are payable wholly out of public funds, and con 
cerning allowances paid to persons who do not fulfil the contribution 
conditions prescribed for the award of a normal pension.
2. The right to compensation for the death of a refugee resulting from employment 
injury or from occupational disease shall not be affected by the fact that the resi 
dence of the beneficiary is outside the territory of the Contracting State.
3. The Contracting States shall extend to refugees the benefits of agreements 
concluded between them, or which may be concluded between them in the future, 
concerning the maintenance of acquired rights and rights in the process of acqui 
sition in regard to social security, subject only to the conditions which apply 
to nationals of the States signatory to the agreements in question.
4. The Contracting States will give sympathetic consideration to extending 
to refugees so far as possible the benefits of similar agreements which may at 
any time be in force between such Contracting States and non-contracting States.
CHAPTER V
ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES 
Article 25
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE
1. When the exercise of a right by a refugee would normally require the assistance 
of authorities of a foreign country to whom he cannot have recourse, the Contract 
ing States in whose territory he is residing shall arrange that such assistance be 
afforded to him by their own authorities or by an international authority.
2. The authority or authorities mentioned in paragraph 1 shall deliver or cause 
to be delivered under their supervision to refugees such documents or certifications 
as would normally be delivered to aliens by or through their national authorities.
3. Documents or certifications so delivered shall stand in the stead of the official 
instruments delivered to aliens by or through their national authorities, and 
shall be given credence in the absence of proof to the contrary.
4. Subject to such exceptional treatment as may be granted to indigent persons, 
fees may be charged for the services mentioned herein, but such fees shall be 
moderate and commensurate with those charged to nationals for similar services.
5. The provisions of this article shall be without prejudice to articles 27 and 28.
No. 2545
172 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 26
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
Each Contracting State shall accord to refugees lawfully in its territory 
the right to choose their place of residence and to move freely within its territory, 
subject to any regulations applicable to aliens generally in the same circumstances.
Article 27
IDENTITY PAPERS
The Contracting States shall issue identity papers to any refugee in their 
territory who does not possess a valid travel document.
Article 28
TRAVEL DOCUMENTS
1. The Contracting States shall issue to refugees lawfully staying in their territory 
travel documents for the purpose of travel outside their territory, unless compelling 
reasons of national security or public order otherwise require, and the provisions 
of the Schedule to this Convention shall apply with respect to such documents. 
The Contracting States may issue such a travel document to any other refugee 
in their territory ; they shall in particular give sympathetic consideration to the 
issue of such a travel document to refugees in their territory who are unable to 
obtain a travel document from the country of their lawful residence.
2. Travel documents issued to refugees under previous international agreements 
by parties thereto shall be recognized and treated by the Contracting States in 
the same way as if they had been issued pursuant to this article.
Article 29
FISCAL CHARGES
1. The Contracting States shall not impose upon refugees duties, charges or 
taxes, of any description whatsoever, other or higher than those which are or 
may be levied on their nationals in similar situations.
2. Nothing in the above paragraph shall prevent the application to refugees 
of the laws and regulations concerning charges in respect of the issue to aliens 
of administrative documents including identity papers.
No. 2545
174 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 30
TRANSFER OF ASSETS
1. A Contracting State shall, in conformity with its laws and regulations, permit 
refugees to transfer assets which they have brought into its territory, to another 
country where they have been admitted for the purposes of resettlement.
2. A Contracting State shall give sympathetic consideration to the application 
of refugees for permission to transfer assets wherever they may be and which are 
necessary for their resettlement in another country to which they have been 
admitted.
Article 31
REFUGEES UNLAWFULLY IN THE COUNTRY OF REFUGE
1. The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of their illegal 
entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly from a territory where their 
life or freedom was threatened in the sense of article 1, enter or are present in their 
territory without authorization, provided they present themselves without delay 
to the authorities and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence.
2. The Contracting States shall not apply to the movements of such refugees 
restrictions other than those which are necessary and such restrictions shall only 
be applied until their status in the country is regularized or they obtain admission 
into another country. The Contracting States shall allow such refugees a reason 
able period and all the necessary facilities to obtain admission into another country.
Article 32
EXPULSION
1. The Contracting States shall not expel a refugee lawfully in their territory 
save on grounds of national security or public order.
2. The expulsion of such a refugee shall be only in pursuance of a decision reached 
in accordance with due process of law. Except where compelling reasons of 
national security otherwise require, the refugee shall be allowed to submit evidence 
to clear himself, and to appeal to and be represented for the purpose before com 
petent authority or a person or persons specially designated by the competent 
authority.
3. The Contracting States shall allow such a refugee a reasonable period within 
which to seek legal admission into another country. The Contracting States 
reserve the right to apply during that period such internal measures as they 
may deem necessary.
No. 2545
176 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 33
PROHIBITION OF EXPULSION OK RETURN 
("REFOULEMENT")
1. No Contracting State shall expel or return ("refouler") a refugee in any manner 
whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threat 
ened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular 
social group or political opinion.
2. The benefit of the present provision may not, however, be claimed by a refugee 
whom there are reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to the security of 
the country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment 
of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that 
country.
Article 34
NATURALIZATION
The Contracting States shall as far as possible facilitate the assimilation 
and naturalization of refugees. They shall in particular make every effort to 
expedite naturalization proceedings and to reduce as far as possible the charges 
and costs of such proceedings.
CHAPTER VI
EXECUTORY AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 
Article 35
CO-OPERATION OF THE NATIONAL AUTHORITIES WITH THE UNITED NATIONS
1. The Contracting States undertake to co-operate with the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or any other agency of the United 
Nations which may succeed it, in the exercise of its functions, and shall in particular 
facilitate its duty of supervising the application of the provisions of this Convention.
2. In order to enable the Office of the High Commissioner or any other agency 
of the United Nations which may succeed it, to make reports to the competent 
organs of the United Nations, the Contracting States undertake to provide them 
in the appropriate form with information and statistical data requested concerning :
(a) the condition of refugees,
(b) the implementation of this Convention, and
(c) laws, regulations and decrees which are, or may hereafter be, in force 
relating to refugees.
No. 2545
178 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Article 36
INFORMATION ON NATIONAL LEGISLATION
The Contracting States shall communicate to the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations the laws and regulations which they may adopt to ensure the 
application of this Convention.
Article 37
RELATION TO PREVIOUS CONVENTIONS
Without prejudice to article 28, paragraph 2, of this Convention, this Con 
vention replaces, as between parties to it, the Arrangements of 5 July 1922, * 31 May 
1924, 12 May 1926,z 30 June 1928s and 30 July 1935, the Conventions of 28 Oc 
tober 1933* and 10 February 1938,5 the Protocol of 14 September 19396 and the 
Agreement of 15 October 1946. ©
CHAPTER VII
FINAL CLAUSES
Article 38
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Any dispute between parties to this Convention relating to its interpretation 
or application, which cannot be settled by other means, shall be referred to the 
International Court of Justice at the request of any one of the parties to the 
dispute.
Article 39
SIGNATURE, RATIFICATION AND ACCESSION
1. This Convention shall be opened for signature at Geneva on 28 July 1951 
and shall thereafter be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
It shall be open for signature at the European Office of the United Nations from
1 League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. XIII, p. 237 ; Vol. XV, p. 322 ; Vol. XIX, p. 284 ; 
Vol. XXIV, p. 178 ; Vol. XXVII, p. 420, and Vol. XLV, p. 103.
* League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. LXXXIX, p. 47.
» League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. LXXXIX, pp. 53 and 63 ; Vol. XCIII, p. 377 ; 
Vol. CCIV, p. 445, and Vol. CCV, p. 193.
* League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CLIX, p. 199 ; Vol. CLXXVII, p. 432 ; Vol. CLXXXI, 
p. 429 ; Vol. CC, p. 530 ; Vol. CCIV, p. 464, and Vol. CCV, p. 214.
' League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CXCII, p. 59 ; Vol. CC, p. 572, and Vol. CCIV, p, 218.
« League of Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. CXCVIII, p. 141, and Vol. CCV, p. 219. 
© United Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. 11, p. 73 ; Vol. 76, p. 244 ; Vol. 82, p. 328 ; Vol. 91, 
p. 369, and Vol. 97, p. 314.
No. 2545
180 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
28 July to 31 August 1951 and shall be re-opened for signature at the Headquarters 
of the United Nations from 17 September 1951 to 31 December 1952.
2. This Convention shall be open for signature on behalf of all States Members 
of the United Nations, and also on behalf of any other State invited to attend 
the Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and Stateless Persons 
or to which an invitation to sign will have been addressed by the General Assembly. 
It shall be ratified and the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall be open from 28 July 1951 for accession by the States 
referred to in paragraph 2 of this article. Accession shall be effected by the deposit 
of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 40
TERRITORIAL APPLICATION CLAUSE
1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratification or accession, declare 
that this Convention shall extend to all or any of the territories for the international 
relations of which it is responsible. Such a declaration shall take effect when 
the Convention enters into force for the State concerned.
2. At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by notification 
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and shall take effect 
as from the ninetieth day after the day of receipt by the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations of this notification, or as from the date of entry into force of the 
Convention for the State concerned, whichever is the later.
3. With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not extended 
at the time of signature, ratification or accession, each State concerned shall 
consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps in order to extend the applica 
tion of this Convention to such territories, subject, where necessary for constitu 
tional reasons, to the consent of the Governments of such territories.
Article 41
FEDERAL CLAUSE
In the case of a Federal or non-unitary State, the following provisions shaJl 
apply :
(a) With respect to those articles of this Convention that come within 
the legislative jurisdiction of the federal legislative authority, the oblig 
ations of the Federal Government shall to this extent be the same as 
those of Parties which are not Federal States ;
No. 2S45
182 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
(b) With respect to those articles of this Convention that come within the 
legislative jurisdiction of constituent States, provinces or cantons which 
are not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound to 
take legislative action, the Federal Government shall bring such articles 
with a favourable recommendation to the notice of the appropriate 
authorities of states, provinces or cantons at the earliest possible moment.
(c) A Federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the request of any 
other Contracting State transmitted through the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations, supply a statement of the law and practice of the 
Federation and its constituent units in regard to any particular provi 
sion of the Convention showing the extent to which effect has been 
given to that provision by legislative or other action.
Article 42
RESERVATIONS
1. At the time of signature, ratification or accession, any State may make 
reservations to articles of the Convention other than to articles 1, 3, 4, 16 (1), 
33, 36-46 inclusive.
2. Any State making a reservation in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article 
may at any time withdraw the reservation by a communication to that effect 
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 43
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Convention shall come into force on the ninetieth day following the day 
of deposit of the sixth instrument of ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the deposit of 
the sixth instrument of ratification or accession, the Convention shall enter into 
force on the ninetieth day following the date of deposit by such State of its ins 
trument of ratification or accession.
Article 44
DENUNCIATION
1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention at any time by a not 
ification addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
2. Such denunciation shall take effect for the Contracting State concerned one 
year from the date upon which it is received by the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations.
No. 2545
184 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
3. Any State which has made a declaration or notification under article 40 may, 
at any time thereafter, by a notification to the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, declare that the Convention shall cease to extend to such territory one 
year after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
Article 45
REVISION
1. Any Contracting State may request revision of this Convention at any time 
by a notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
2. The General Assembly of the United Nations shall recommend the steps, 
if any, to be taken in respect of such request.
Article 46
NOTIFICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform all Members of the 
United Nations and non-member States referred to in article 39 :
(a) Of declarations and notifications in accordance with section B of article 1 ;
(b) Of signatures, ratifications and accessions in accordance with article 39 ;
(c) Of declarations and notifications in accordance with article 40 ;
(d) Of reservations and withdrawals in accordance with article 42 ;
(e) Of the date on which this Convention will come into force in accordance
with article 43 ;
(/) Of denunciations and notifications in accordance with article 44 ; 
(g) Of requests for revision in accordance with article 45.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have signed this Con 
vention on behalf of their respective Governments,
DONE at Geneva, this twenty-eighth day of July, one thousand nine hundred 
and fifty-one, in a single copy, of which the English and French texts are equally 
authentic and which shall remain deposited in the archives of the United Nations, 
and certified true copies of which shall be delivered to all Members of the United 
Nations and to the non-member States referred to in article 39.
No. 2545
186 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Afghanistan Afghanistan
Albania Albanie
Argentina Argentine
Australia Australie
Austria Autriche
Dr Karl FRITZER
Sous les réserves qui suivent : a) les stipulations figurant aux 
articles 6, 7 (2), 8, 17 (1 et 2), 23 et 25 ne sont reconnues que 
comme des recommandations et non comme des obligations qui 
s'imposent juridiquement ; b) les stipulations figurant à l'ar 
ticle 22 (1 et 2) ne sont acceptées que dans la mesure où elles 
s'appliquent à l'éducation publique ; c) les stipulations figurant 
à l'article 31 (1) ne sont acceptées qu'en ce qui concerne les 
réfugiés qui n'ont pas fait l'objet dans le passé d'une décision 
émanant d'une autorité juridictionnelle ou administrative 
compétente autrichienne d'interdiction de séjour (Aufenthalt- 
verbot) ou d'expulsion (Ausweisung ou Abschaffung) ; d) les 
stipulations figurant à l'article 32 ne sont acceptées qu'en ce qui 
concerne les réfugiés qui ne feraient pas l'objet d'une expulsion 
pour des raisons de sécurité nationale ou d'ordre public, comme 
conséquence d'une mesure trouvant son fondement dans le 
droit pénal, ou pour un autre motif d'intérêt public.
Il est déclaré en outre qu'au point de vue des obligations 
assumées par la République d'Autriche en vertu de la Conven 
tion l'expression « événements survenus avant le premier 
janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article 1, section A, sera comprise 
comme se référant aux événements survenus avant le premier 
janvier 1951 en Europe ou ailleurs 1.
" [TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 Subject to the following reservations : (a) the provisions of articles 6, 7 (2), 8, 17 (1 and 2), 
23 and 25, are recognized only as recommendations and not as legally binding obligations ; 
(b) the provisions of article 22 (1 and 2) are accepted only in so far as they apply to public educa-
No. 2545
1954 Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 187
Belgium Belgique
HERMENT
Sous la réserve suivante : Dans tous les cas où la Convention 
confère aux réfugiés le traitement le plus favorable accordé 
aux ressortissants d'un pays étranger, cette clause ne sera 
pas interprétée par le Gouvernement belge comme devant 
comporter le régime accordé aux nationaux des pays avec 
lesquels la Belgique a conclu des accords régionaux, douaniers, 
économiques ou politiques 2.
Bolivia Bolivie
Brazil Brésil
Joâo Carlos MUNIZ 
New York 15 de julho do 1952
Bulgaria Bulgarie
Burma Birmanie
Byelorussian Soviet République socialiste 
Socialist Republic soviétique de Biélorussie
tion ; (c) thé provisions of article 31 (1) are accepted only in respect of refugees who have not, 
in the past, been the subject of a decision by a competent Austrian judicial or administrative 
authority prohibiting residence (Aufenthaltverbot) or ordering expulsion (Ausweisung or Ab- 
schaffung) ; (d) the provisions of article 32 are accepted only in respect of refugees who are not 
ordered to be expelled for reasons of national security or public order, in pursuance of a measure 
based on criminal law, or for any other reason of public policy.
It is also declared that, for the purpose of the obligations assumed by the Austrian Republic 
under this Convention, the words "events occurring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, section A, 
shall be understood as referring to events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951.
8 Subject to the following reservation : in all cases where this Convention grants to refugees 
the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of a foreign country, this provision shall 
not be interpreted by the Belgian Government as necessarily involving the regime accorded to 
nationals of countries with which Belgium has concluded regional, customs, economic or political 
agreements.
N° 2545
188 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Cambodia Cambodge
Canada Canada
Ceylon Ceylan
Chile Chili
China Chine
Colombia Colombie
G. GlRALDO-jARAMILLO
En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement de la 
Colombie déclare qu'au point de vue des obligations assumées 
par lui en vertu de la Convention, l'expression « événements 
survenus avant le premier janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article 1, 
section A, sera comprise comme se référant aux événements 
survenus avant le premier janvier 1951 en Europe 1.
Costa Rica Costa-Rica
Cuba Cuba
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 In signing this Convention, the Government of Colombia declares that, for the purpose of 
its obligations thereunder, the words "events occurring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, sec 
tion A, shall be understood as referring to events occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951.
5» 5
1954 Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 189
Czechoslovakia Tchécoslovaquie
Denmark Danemark
Knud LARSEN
In signing this Convention, the Government of Denmark 
declares that for the purpose of its obligations thereunder the 
words « events occurring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, 
section A, shall be understood as referring to events occurring 
in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951. 1
Dominican Republic République Dominicaine
Ecuador Equateur
Egypt Egypte
El Salvador Salvador
Ethiopia Ethiopie
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement du Danemark déclare qu'au point de vue 
des obligations assumées par lui en vertu de la Convention, l'expression « événements survenus 
avant le premier janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article premier de la section A, sera comprise comme 
se référant aux événements survenus avant le premier janvier 1951 en Europe ou ailleurs.
N° 2545
190 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Federal Republic of Germany République fédérale d'Allemagne
Dr. Heinz KREKELER 
New York, November 19th 1951
In signing this Convention, the Government of the Federal 
Republic of Germany declares that for the purpose of its oblig 
ations thereunder the words "events occurring before 1 January 
1951" in article 1, section A, shall be understood as referring to 
events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951. 1
Finland Finlande
France France
H. HOPPENOT 2
11 septembre 1952
Greece Grèce
Alexis KYROU 
10 avril 1952
En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement de la Grèce 
déclare qu'au point de vue des obligations assumées par lui 
en vertu de la Convention, l'expression « événements survenus
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement de la République fédérale d'Allemagne 
déclare qu'au point de vue des obligations assumées par lui en vertu de la Convention, l'expres 
sion « événements survenus avant le premier janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article 1er, section A, 
sera comprise comme se référant aux événements survenus avant le premier janvier 1951 en 
Europe ou ailleurs.
* Au moment de la signature, le Représen- a At the time of signature, the Permanent 
tant permanent de la France a fait la déclara- Representative of France made the following 
tion suivante : declaration :
« Conformément au paragraphe 1) de la 
section B de l'article premier, le Gouverne 
ment français déclare qu'au point de vue des 
obligations assumées par lui en vertu de la 
présente Convention, les mots « événements 
survenus avant le 1er janvier 1951 » figurant 
au paragraphe 2) de la section A de l'article 
premier seront compris dans le sens : « événe 
ments survenus avant le 1er janvier 1951 en 
Europe ». En ce qui concerne le champ d'ap 
plication de la Convention, une déclaration 
sera faite au moment de la ratification, con 
formément à l'article 40. »
No. 2545[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION] 
"In accordance with Article 1, Section 
B(l), the French Government declares that 
for the purpose of its obligations under this 
Convention, the words "events occurring 
before 1 January 1951" in Article 1, Section 
A(2), shall be understood to mean "events 
occurring in Europe before 1 January 
1951". A declaration regarding the terri 
torial application of the Convention will 
be made at the time of ratification, in 
accordance with Article 40."
1954 Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 191
avant le premier janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article 1, section A, 
sera comprise comme se référant aux événements survenus 
avant le premier janvier 1951 en Europe ou ailleurs 1.
Guatemala Guatemala
Haiti Haïti
Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan Royaume hachémite de Jordanie
Holy See Saint-Siège
May 21, 1952 
Amleto G. CICOGNANI
Honduras Honduras
Hungary Hongrie
Iceland Islande
India Inde
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 In signing this Convention, the Government of Greece declares that for the purpose of 
its obligations thereunder the words "events occurring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, sec 
tion A, shall be understood as referring to events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January
NO 2545
192 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Indonesia Indonésie
Iran Iran
Iraq Irak
Ireland Irlande
Israël Israël
Jacob ROBINSON 
August 1st, 1951
Italy Italie
En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement de la Répu 
blique italienne déclare que les stipulations figurant aux 
articles 6, 7(2), 8, 17, 18, 19, 22 (2), 23, 25 et 34 ne sont 
reconnues par lui que comme des recommandations.
Il déclare en outre qu'au point de vue des obligations 
assumées par la République italienne en vertu de la Convention, 
l'expression « événements survenus avant le premier janvier 
1951 » figurant à l'article 1er, section A (2), sera comprise comme 
se référant aux événements survenus avant le premier janvier 
1951 en Europe 1.
le 23 juillet 1952 
Gastone GUIDOTTI
Japan Japon
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 In signing this Convention, the Government of the Republic of Italy declares that the 
provisions of articles 6, 7 (2), 8, 17, 18, 19, 22 (2), 23, 25 and 34 are recognized by it as recommen 
dations only.
It also declares that for the purpose of the obligations assumed by the Republic of Italy 
under this Convention, the words "events occurring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, section 
A (2), shall be understood as referring to events occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951.
No. 2545
1954 Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 193
Laos Laos
Lebanon Liban
Libéria Libéria
Liechtenstein Liechtenstein
Ph. ZUTTER 
0. SCHURCH
Luxembourg Luxembourg
J. STURM
Sous la réserve suivante :
Dans tous les cas où la Convention confère aux réfugiés 
le traitement le plus favorable accordé aux ressortissants d'un 
pays étranger, cette clause ne sera pas interprétée comme 
devant comporter le régime accordé aux nationaux des pays 
avec lesquels le Grand-Duché du Luxembourg a conclu des 
accords régionaux, douaniers, économiques ou politiques 1.
Mexico , Mexique
Monaco Monaco
Népal Népal
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 Subject to the following reservation : in all cases where this Convention grants to refugees 
the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of a foreign country, this provision shall not 
be interpreted as necessarily involving the regime accorded to nationals of countries with which 
the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg has concluded regional, customs, economic or political 
agreements.
N° 2545
194 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Netherlands Pays-Bas
E. O. BOETZELAER
En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement des Pays- 
Bas déclare qu'au point de vue des obligations assumées par 
lui en vertu de la Convention, l'expression « événements survenus 
avant le premier janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article 1, section A, 
sera comprise comme se référant aux événements survenus 
avant le premier janvier 1951 en Europe ou ailleurs.
Cette signature est faite sous la réserve que dans tous les cas 
où cette Convention confère aux réfugiés le traitement le plus 
favorable accordé aux ressortissants d'un pays étranger, cette 
clause ne sera pas interprétée comme comportant le régime 
accordé aux nationaux des pays avec lesquels les Pays-Bas ont 
conclu des accords régionaux, douaniers, économiques ou 
politiques 1.
New Zealand Nouvelle-Zélande
Nicaragua Nicaragua
Norway Norvège
Peter ANKER 
Sous réserve de ratification 2.
Pakistan Pakistan
Panama Panama
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 In signing this Convention, the Government of the Netherlands declares that, for the 
purpose of its obligations thereunder, the words "events occurring before 1 January 1951" in 
article 1, section A, shall be understood as referring to events occurring in Europe or elsewhere 
before 1 January 1951.
This signature is appended subject to the reservation that in all cases where this Convention 
grants to refugees the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of a foreign country this 
provision shall not be interpreted as involving the regime accorded to nationals of countries with 
which the Netherlands has concluded regional, customs, economic or political agreements.
* Subject to ratification.
No. 2545
1954 Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 195
Paraguay Paraguay
Peru Pérou
Philippines Philippines
Poland Pologne
Portugal Portugal
Republic of Korea République de Corée
Rumania Roumanie
Saudi Arabia Arabie Séoudite
Sweden
SwitzerlandSture PETRÉN
Ph. ZUTTER 
O. SCHURCHSuède
Suisse
N° 2545
196 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Syria Syrie
Thailand Thaïlande
Turkey Turquie
Talat MIRAS 
24 août 1951
En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement de la 
République turque déclare qu'au point de vue des obligations 
assumées par lui en vertu de la Convention, l'expression « événe 
ments survenus avant le 1er janvier 1951 » figurant à l'article 1, 
section A, sera comprise comme se référant aux événements 
survenus avant le 1er janvier 1951 en Europe. Il n'entend donc 
assumer aucune obligation en relation avec les événements 
survenus en dehors de l'Europe.
Le Gouvernement turc considère, d'autre part, que l'expres 
sion « événements survenus avant le 1er janvier 1951 » se rapporte 
au commencement des événements. Par conséquent, comme 
la pression exercée sur la minorité turque de Bulgarie, qui 
commença avant le 1er janvier 1951, continue toujours, les 
réfugiés de Bulgarie d'origine turque, obligés de quitter ce pays 
par suite de cette pression, qui, ne pouvant passer en Turquie, 
se réfugieraient sur le territoire d'une autre partie contractante 
après le 1er janvier 1951, doivent également bénéficier des 
dispositions de cette Convention.
Le Gouvernement turc formulera, au moment de la ratifi 
cation, des réserves qu'il pourrait faire conformément à l'article 
42 de la Convention.
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 The Government of the Turkish Republic, in signing this Convention, states that, so far 
as the commitments accepted by it under the Convention are concerned, the term "events occur 
ring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, Part A, shall be understood to refer to events occurring 
in Europe before 1 January. It does not therefore intend to accept any commitment in con 
nexion with events occurring outside of Europe.
The Turkish Government considers, moreover, that the term "events occurring before 
1 January 1951" refers to the beginning of the events. Consequently, since the pressure exerted 
upon the Turkish minority in Bulgaria, which began before 1 January 1951, is still continuing, 
the provisions of this Convention must also apply to the Bulgarian refugees of Turkish extraction 
compelled to leave that country as a result of this pressure and who, being unable to enter Turkey, 
might seek refuge on the territory of another contracting party after 1 January 1951.
The Turkish Government will, at the time of ratification, enter reservations which it could 
make under article 42 of the Convention.
No. 2545
1954 Nations Unies — Recueil des Traités 197
United Kingdom of Great Britain Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne 
and Northern Ireland et d'Irlande du Nord
S. HOARE
J. B. HOWARD
In signing this Convention, the Government of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland declares that 
for the purpose of its obligations thereunder the words "events 
occurring before 1 January 1951" in article 1, section A, shall 
be understood as referring to events occurring in Europe or 
elsewhere before 1 January 1951. 1
United States of America États-Unis d'Amérique
Uruguay Uruguay
Venezuela Venezuela
Viet Nam Viet Nam
Yemen Yemen
Yugoslavia Yougoslavie
S. MAKIEDO
Le Gouvernement de la RPF de Yougoslavie se réserve 
le droit de formuler en ratifiant la Convention telles réserves 
qu'il jugera appropriées, conformément à l'article 42 de la 
Convention 2.
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
1 En signant cette Convention, le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et 
d'Irlande du Nord déclare qu'au point de vue des obligations assumées par lui en vertu de la 
Convention, l'expression « événements survenus avant le premier janvier 1951 » figurant à l'ar 
ticle 1, section A, sera comprise comme se référant aux événements survenus avant le premier 
janvier 1951 en Europe ou ailleurs.
1 The Government of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia reserves the right, in 
ratifying this Convention, to formulate such reservations as it may deem appropriate, in accord 
ance with article 42 of this Convention.
N° 2545
198 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
DECLARATIONS AND RESERVATIONS MADE AT THE TIME OF 
RATIFICATION OR ACCESSION
DENMARK
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION] 
"Denmark is not bound by articles 14 and 17 or by article 24, paragraph 3 ;
"The provisions of article 24, paragraph 1, under which refugees are in certain 
cases placed on the same footing as nationals, shall not oblige Denmark to grant 
refugees in every case exactly the same remuneration as that provided by law 
for nationals, but only to grant them what is required for their support ;
"Paragraph 2 of the same article shall be binding upon Denmark only if the 
beneficiary is a national of a State which grants Danish nationals the same treat 
ment as its own nationals from the point of view of the benefits provided for in 
its relevant legislation."
NORWAY
Declaration
"In accordance with article 1, section B (1), the Government of Norway 
declares that for the purpose of its obligations under this Convention, the words 
'events occurring before 1 January 1951', in article 1, section A (2), shall be 
understood to mean 'events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951' ".
Reservations*
"The obligation stipulated in article 17 (1) to accord to refugees lawfully 
staying in the country the most favourable treatment accorded to nationals of 
a foreign country in the same circumstances as regards the right to engage in 
wage-earning employment, shall not be construed as extending to refugees the 
benefits of agreements which may in the future be concluded between Norway, 
Denmark, Finland, Iceland and Sweden, or between Norway and any one of 
these countries, for the purpose of establishing special conditions for the transfer 
of labour between these countries.
"The obligation stipulated in article 24 (1) (b) to accord to refugees lawfully- 
staying in the country the same treatment as is accorded to nationals in respect
* By a communication received on 21 January 1954, the Government of Norway gavv 
notice of the withdrawal, with immediate effect, of the reservation made by it to article '24 of 
the Convention.
No. 2545
200 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
of social security, shall not apply as regards benefits payable under the Act of the 
16th July, 1936, relating to the disabled and the blind or the Act relating to family 
allowances of the 24th October, 1946, nor as regards the benefits payable under 
the Act of the 24th June, 1931, relating to employment injury insurance for 
seamen.
"A reservation is also made with respect to the provisions contained in article 
24 (3) insofar as payment of benefits under the three above-mentioned Acts is 
concerned."
BELGIUM
Declaration [TRANSLATION]
"The words 'events occurring before 1 January 1951', in article 1, section A 
of the Convention, should, from the point of view of the obligations assumed by 
the Belgian Government in virtue of the Convention, be understood to mean 
•events occurring in Europe or elsewhere before 1 January 1951' ".
Reservations [TRANSLATION]
"1. In all cases where the Convention grants to refugees the most favourable 
treatment accorded to nationals of a foreign country, this provision shall not 
be interpreted by the Belgian Government as necessarily involving the régime 
accorded to nationals of countries with which Belgium has concluded regional 
customs, economic or political agreements.
"2. Article 15 of the Convention shall not be applicable in Belgium ; refugees 
lawfully staying in Belgian territory will enjoy the same treatment, as regards 
the right of association, as that accorded to aliens in general."
LUXEMBOURG
[TRANSLATION — TRADUCTION]
"The Grand Ducal Government understands the words 'events occurring 
before 1 January 1951', in article 1, section A of the Convention, to mean 'events 
occurring in Europe before 1 January 1951' in accordance with alternative (a) 
in section B of the same article".
AUSTRALIA
Declaration
"In accordance with article 1, section B (1), the Government of the Common 
wealth of Australia declares that, for the purpose of its obligations under this 
Convention, the words 'events occurring before 1 January 1951' in Article 1,
No. 2545
202 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
section A shall be understood to mean "events occurring in Europe before 1 Jan 
uary, 1951' ".
Reservations
"The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia understands that 
none of the obligations with regard to refugees stipulated in Articles 17, 18, 19 
and 26 of the Convention precludes :
"(a) the imposition of conditions upon which a refugee may enter the Com 
monwealth of Australia or any of its Territories where the entry is 
made for a specific purpose ; or
"(6) the making of arrangements with a refugee under which he is required 
to undertake employment under the direction of the Government 
of the Commonwealth of Australia for a specified period after his 
entry into the Commonwealth of Australia or any of its Territories.
"The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia makes a reservation 
with respect to the provisions contained in paragraph 1 of Article 28 of the Con 
vention and does not accept the obligations stipulated in this paragraph but is 
prepared to recognize travel documents issued by other Contracting States pursuant 
to this Article.
"The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia makes a reservation 
with respect to the provisions contained in Article 32 of the Convention and 
does not accept the obligations stipulated in this Article."
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
"When ratifying the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees signed 
at Geneva on July 28, 1951, and in accordance with Article 42, paragraph 1, 
thereof, the Government of the United Kingdom have deemed it necessary to 
make certain reservations thereto, the text of which is reproduced below :
"(i) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland understand Articles 8 and 9 as not preventing them from taking in time 
of war or other grave and exceptional circumstances measures in the interests 
of national security in the case of a refugee on the ground of his nationality. 
The Provisions of Article 8 shall not prevent the Government of the United King 
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from exercising any rights over property 
or interests which they may acquire or have acquired as an Allied or Associated 
power under a Treaty of Peace or other agreement or arrangement for the restor 
ation of peace which has been or may be completed as a result of the Second 
World War. Furthermore, the provisions of Article 8 shall not affect the treatment 
to be accorded to any property or interests which at the date of entry into force
Nn. 2545
204 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
of this Convention for the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
are under the control of the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland by reason of a state of war which exists or existed between 
them and any other State.
"(ii) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland accept paragraph 2 of Article 17 with the substitution of "four years" 
for "three years" in sub-paragraph (a) and with the omission of sub-paragraph (c).
"(iii) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, in respect of such of the matters referred to in sub-paragraph (b) of par 
agraph 1 of Article 24 as fall within the scope of the National Health Service, 
can only undertake to apply the provisions of that paragraph so far as the law 
allows ; and it can only undertake to apply the provisions of paragraph 2 of that 
Article so far as the law allows.
"(iv) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland cannot undertake to give effect to the obligations contained in paragraphs 1 
and 2 of Article 25 and can only undertake to apply the provisions of paragraph 3 
so far as the law allows.
Commentary
"In connexion with sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1 of Article 24 relating 
to certain matters within the scope of the National Health Service, the National 
Health Service (Amendment) Act, 1949, contains powers for charges to be made 
to persons not ordinarily resident in Great Britain (which category would include 
refugees) who receive treatment under the Service. While these powers have 
not yet been exercised it is possible that this might have to be done at some future 
date. In Northern Ireland the health services are restricted to persons ordinarily 
resident in the country except where regulations are made to extend the Service 
to others. It is for these reasons that the Government of the United Kingdom 
while they are prepared in the future, as in the past, to give the most sympathetic 
consideration to the situation of refugees, find it necessary to make a reservation 
to sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1 of Article 24 of the Convention.
"The scheme of Industrial Injuries Insurance in Great Britain does not meet 
the requirements of paragraph 2 of Article 24 of the Convention. Where an 
insured person has died as the result of an industrial accident or a disease due 
to the nature of his employment, benefit cannot generally be paid to his dependents 
who are abroad unless they are in any part of the British Commonwealth, in the 
Irish Republic or in a country with which the United Kingdom has made a reciprocal 
agreement concerning the payment of industrial injury benefits. There is an 
exception to this rule in favour of the dependents of certain seamen who die as 
a result of industrial accidents happening to them while they are in the service
No. 2545
206 United Nations -— Treaty Series 1954
of British ships. In this matter refugees are treated in the same way as citizens 
of the United Kingdom and Colonies and by reason of paragraphs 3 and 4 of 
Article 24 of the Convention, the dependents of refugees will be able to take 
advantage of reciprocal agreements which provide for the payment of United 
Kingdom industrial injury benefits in other countries. By reason of paragraphs 
(3) and (4) of Article 24 refugees will enjoy under the scheme of National Insurance 
and Industrial injuries Insurance certain rights which are withheld from British 
subjects who are not citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies.
"No arrangements exist in the United Kingdom for the administrative assist 
ance for which provision is made in Article 25 nor have any such arrangements 
been found necessary in the case of refugees. Any need for the documents or 
certifications mentioned in paragraph 2 of that Article would be met by affidavits.
Declaration
"I have the honour to refer to my note of this day's date forwarding for 
deposit the instrument of ratification by the Government of the United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of the Convention relating to the Status 
of Refugees, which was opened for signature at Geneva on July 28, 1951, and to 
inform Your Excellency that Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom 
desire, at the time of ratifying the Convention, to make a declaration, in accordance 
with the terms of Article 40, paragraph 1, thereof, concerning its extension to the 
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
"I am accordingly instructed by Her Britannic Majesty's Principal Secretary 
of State for Foreign Affairs hereby to declare on behalf of the Government of the 
United Kingdom and in accordance with Article 40, paragraph 1 thereof, that 
the above-mentioned Convention extends to the Channel Islands and the Isle 
of Man subject to the following reservations made under the terms of Article 42, 
paragraph 1, of the Convention :—
" (i) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland understand Articles 8 and 9 as not preventing the taking in the Isle of 
Man and in the Channel Islands, in time of war or other grave and exceptional 
circumstances, of measures in the interests of national security in the case of a 
refugee on the ground of his nationality. The provisions of Article 8 shall not 
prevent the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland from exercising any rights over property or interests which they may 
acquire or have acquired as an Allied or Associated power under a Treaty of Peace 
or other agreement or arrangement for the restoration of peace which has been 
or may be completed as a result of the Second World War. Furthermore, the
No. 2545
208 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
provisions of Article 8 shall not affect the treatment to be accorded to any property 
or interests which at the date of the entry into force of this Convention for the 
Isle of Man and the Channel Islands are under the control of the Government 
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland by reason of a 
state of war which exists or existed between them and any other state.
" (ii) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland accept paragraph 2 of Article 17 in its application to the Isle of Man 
and the Channel Islands with the substitution of "four years" for "three years" 
in sub-paragraph (a) and with the omission of sub-paragraph (c).
"(iii) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland can only undertake that the provisions of sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 1 
of Article 24 and of paragraph 2 of that Article will be applied in the Channel 
Islands so far as the law allows, and that the provisions of that sub-paragraph, 
in respect of such matters referred to therein as fall within the scope of the Isle 
of Man Health Service, and of paragraph 2 of that Article will be applied in the 
Isle of Man so far as the law allows.
"(iv) The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland cannot undertake that effect will be given in the Isle of Man and the 
Channel Islands to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 25 and can only undertake that 
the provisions of paragraph 3 will be applied in the Isle of Man and the Channel 
Islands so far as the law allows.
"The considerations upon which certain of these reservations are based are 
similar to those set out in the memorandum relating to the corresponding reser 
vations made in respect of the United Kingdom, which was enclosed in my note 
under reference."
No. 2545
210 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
s CH E D u L E
Paragraph 1
1. The travel document referred to in article 28 of this Convention shall be similar 
to the specimen annexed hereto.
2. The document shall be made out in at least two languages, one of which shall lx- 
English or French.
Paragraph 2
Subject to the regulations obtaining in the country of issue, children may IK- included 
in the travel document of a parent or, in exceptional circumstances, of another adult 
refugee.
Paragraph 3
The fees charged for issue of the document shall not exceed the lowest scale of charges 
for national passports.
Paragraph 4
Save in special or exceptional cases, the document shall be made valid for the largest 
possible number of countries.
Paragraph 5
The document shall have a validity of either one or two years, at the discretion 
••if the issuing authority.
Paragraph 6
1. The renewal or extension of the validity of the document is a matter for the authority 
which issued it, so long as the holder has not established lawful residence in another 
territory and resides lawfully in the territory of the said authority. The issue of a new 
document is, under the same conditions, a matter for the authority which issued the 
former document.
2. Diplomatic or consular authorities, specially authorized for the purpose, shall be 
empowered to extend, for a period not exceeding six months, the validity of travel 
documents issued by their Governments.
3. The Contracting States shall give sympathetic consideration to renewing or extending 
the validity of travel documents or issuing new documents to refugees no longer lawfully 
resident in their territory who are unable to obtain a travel document from the country 
of their lawful residence.
Paragraph 7
The Contracting States shall recognize the validity of the documents issued in accord 
ance with the provisions of article 28 of this Convention.
No, 2545
212 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Paragraph 8
The competent authorities of the country to which the refugee desires to proceed 
shall, if they are prepared to admit him and if a visa is required, affix a visa on the 
document of which he is the holder.
Paragraph 9
1. The Contracting States undertake to issue transit visas to refugees who have obtained 
visas for a territory of final destination.
2. The issue of such visas may be refused on grounds which would justify refusal of a 
visa to any alien.
Paragraph 10
The fees for the issue of exit, entry or transit visas shall not exceed the lowest scale 
of charges for visas on foreign passports.
Paragraph 11
When a refugee has lawfully taken up residence in the territory of another Contracting 
State, the responsibility for the issue of a new document, under the terms and conditions 
of article 28, shall be that of the competent authority of that territory, to which the 
refugee shall be entitled to apply.
Paragraph 12
The authority issuing a new document shall withdraw the old document and shall 
return it to the country of issue if it is stated in the document that it should be so returned ; 
otherwise it shall withdraw and cancel the document.
Paragraph 13
1. Each Contracting State undertakes that the holder of a travel document issued by 
it in accordance with article 28 of this Convention shall be readmitted to its territory 
at any time during the period of its validity.
2. Subject to the provisions of the preceding sub-paragraph, a Contracting State may 
require the holder of the document to comply with such formalities as may be prescribed 
in regard to exit from or return to its territory.
3. The Contracting States reserve the right, in exceptional cases, or in cases where the 
refugee's stay is authorized for a specific period, when issuing the document, to limit 
the period during which the refugee may return to a period of not less than three months.
Paragraph 14
Subject only to the terms of paragraph 13, the provisions of this Schedule in no 
way affect the laws and regulations governing the conditions of admission to, transit 
through, residence and establishment in, and departure from, the territories of the 
Contracting States.
No. 2545
214 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Paragraph 15
Neither the issue of the document nor the entries made thereon determine or affect, 
the status of the holder, particularly as regards nationality.
Paragraph 16
The issue of the document does not in any way entitle the holder to the protection 
of the diplomatic or consular authorities of the country of issue, and does not confer 
on these authorities a right of protection.
ANNEX
SPECIMEN TRAVEL DOCUMENT
The document will be in booklet form (approximately 15 x 10 centimetres).
It is recommended that it be so printed that any erasure or alteration by chemical 
or other means can be readily detected, and that the words "Convention of 28 July 1951" 
be printed in continuous repetition on each page, in the language of the issuing country,
(Cover of booklet)
TRAVEL DOCUMENT
(Convention of 28 July 1951)
(1)
TRAVEL DOCUMENT 
(Convention of 28 July 1951)
This document expires on ............................
unless its validity is extended or renewed.
Name ....................................
Forename(s) .................................
Accompanied by ...................... child (children;
1. This document is issued solely with a view to providing the holder with a travel 
document which can serve in lieu of a national passport. It is without prejudice to and 
in no way affects the holder's nationality.
No. 2545
216 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
2. The holder is authorized to return to ............... [state here
the country whose authorities are issuing the document] on or before ..........
..... unless some later date is hereafter specified. [The period during which the
holder is allowed to return must not be less than three months.]
3. Should the holder take up residence in a country other than that which issued the- 
present document, he must, if he wishes to travel again, apply to the competent author 
ities of his country of residence for a new document. [The old travel document shall 
be withdrawn by the authority issuing the new document and returned to the authority 
which issued it.]1
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
(2) 
Place and date of birth .........
Occupation ...............
Present residence ............
*Maiden name and forename(s) of wife . . .
*Name and forename(s) of husband .......
Description
Height ......
Hair .......
Colour of eyes . . 
Nose ......
Shape of face . . . 
Complexion . . . 
Special peculiarities
Children accompanying holder
Name Forename (s) Place and Sex
date of birth
*Strike out whichever does not apply. 
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
1 The sentence in brackets to be inserted by Governments which so desire. 
No. 2545
218 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
(3)
Photograph of holder and stamp of issuing authority 
Finger-prints of holder (if required)
Signature of holder .................
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
(4) 
1. This document is valid for the following countries :
2 Document or documents on the basis of which the present document is issued
Issued at 
Date . .
Signature and stamp of authority 
issuing the document :
Fee paid :
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
(5) 
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid : From .....
To .......
Done at .............. Date ......
Signature and stamp of authority
extending or renewing the validity
of the document :
No. 2545
220 United Nations — Treaty Series 1954
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid : From .................
To ...................
Done at .............. Date ..................
Signature and stamp of authority
extending or renewing the validity
of the document :
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
(6)
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid : From
To . . 
Done at .............. Date .
Signature and stamp of authority
extending or renewing the validity
of the document :
Extension or renewal of validity
Fee paid : From .....
To .......
Done at .............. Date ......
Signature and stamp of authority
extending or renewing the validity
of the document :
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
(7-32) 
Visas
The name of the holder of the document must be repeated in each visa. 
(This document contains ... pages, exclusive of cover.)
No. 2543